In this video we'll see some of the stream formatting options available for integers.
Integers have four basic formatting options.
And let's see what the defaults are for those options first integers are displayed in base 10 by default.
This makes sense since base 10 is what most people in the world uses their base system.
However we also have the option of displaying integers in base 8 which is called octal and base 16 which
is called hexadecimal.
Remember computers worked in base 2 or binary and that's difficult for humans to understand.
So we need alternate base systems base 10 is what we learned in school and that's the way we count and
do math.
But it's not so intuitive to convert decimal to binary the alternate bases are often used in computing
since they allow us to group information more like a computer would.
For example since octal is base 8 we can group consecutive binary digits into groups of three.
Starting from the right and we can easily convert between octal and binary and back again hexadecimal
is base 16 which allows us to represent locations in memory since each hexadecimal digit represents
8 bits or one byte.
If you recall earlier in the course when we displayed addresses that were displayed in hexadecimal format.
We also have the option to display the base as a prefix for Hex and octal values for Hex we start with
0 X followed by the hex number and for octal we start with zero.
This clearly tells the reader that the number is hex or octal since in some cases it would be impossible
to tell otherwise the default is not to show the base.
We can show the letters in hex numbers as well as the hex prefix in upper or lower case and lowercase
is the default.
And finally we can choose to display the plus sign when we have positive integers the default as we've
seen already is not to display the plus sign when an engine is positive.
This might sound complicated and intimidating but it's easy as pie.
Let me show you how we can use the Io's tree manipulators to change the way we format integers.
First let's see an example of displaying integers using different bases.
Here we initialized numb to 255.
That is 255 in base 10 just like we're used to doing.
Now we can use the base manipulators to change the way the integer is formatted.
Remember even though the output changes 255 is still stored and numb and we're not going to change it.
First we you stood Yes and that means decimal.
And that displays the number in base 10.
We really don't have to specify this at all since the default.
But I wanted to show you how to do it and this would display 255.
The second display statement uses stood hex.
In this case we display F F which is the hexadecimal value for 255.
Also note that the f's are in lowercase which is also the default.
Finally we have the Octa manipulator and we display 277 which is the octal value for decimal 255.
Once we set the base using the manipulator that base will be used for all future insertions of any integer
on the output stream.
So that setting will persist.
Now if we see 255 and 2 77 out of context it would be virtually impossible to tell whether they were
base 8 or base 10.
So that's where the show base manipulator comes in handy I'll show you that in the next slide.
So in this example we have the same code except we're using the show based manipulator.
Now when we execute the same code.
Notice that 2:55 is unchanged but the hexadecimal F F now has a 0 x prefix and it's in lowercase.
Also the octal 377 now has a zero preceding it.
Now it's very clear what the base of each of these numbers is.
Also note that the show base is applied to all further integer stream insertion so it also persists.
We can toggle back to not showing the base by using stood no show base sometimes we want to be able
to display hexadecimal digits in uppercase as well and sometimes we want to display the 0 x prefix in
uppercase.
We can do this with the uppercase manipulator in this case we're using show base and upper case and
then we use the hex manipulator and display the number.
Notice how we display 0 x f f and all the letters are uppercase like show base upper case will you be
used for all further hex output.
And we can go back to lower case using no upper case.
Now let's see how the show positive manipulator works if we use show pause or show positive then we'll
get a preceding plus sign on positive integers.
You can see in the provided code that we have two integers.
Number one which is initialized to 255.
And number two which is initialized to minus 255 without using the Chopins manipulator.
If we display these integers we get 255 and negative 255.
Note that there is no plus sign in front of the positive 255.
However when we use this show doesn't appear later.
Now we see the plus sign in front of the positive 255.
This can be useful sometimes depending on the application.
Some accounting software wants that plus sign in front of the number.
Again this setting also persists.
So it will apply to any other entity or stream output.
And again we can go back by to not showing the plus side with the no show pause manipulator.
That's it.
I told you it was easy.
There are also several variations using the F method and we can also reset to defaults using stood reset
as flags and providing the flies we want.
I encourage you to do as I do that is not memorize any of these things but just know where to look them
on the C++ reference documentation is pretty good.
And everything's there.
Unless of course you want to memorize them that's up to you.
OK so let's head over to the ID and try some of these combinations out.
OK so I mean the idea I mean the section 19 workspace in the manip underscore integer project.
And what I'm doing this project just manipulating integers just like we did in the slides and converting
them to different bases and then I'm playing around with some of these manipulators.
So let's start by first of all including IO stream and IO manip we need to do that too in order we use
our manipulators.
And I've got an integer here that I've defined and initialized to 255 It's called name.
OK so let's start right here.
Here what we're doing is we're displaying numb.
And again it's only the one variable we're going to use throughout this example.
We're displaying it in decimal format.
Again we don't really need to do this here since it's the default.
And then in hex and then in octal and so when we run this we see 2:55 F-F which is the Hecht's and 377
which is awful just like we saw in the slides.
So that's pretty pretty straightforward.
And now like I said sometimes if you see those two integers or those two series of numbers you really
don't know what the base is so we can use the show base manipulator right here as I'm using right here
on line 18.
And now when I run it we'll see the base.
So now we're going to see the 0 x right here in front of the hexadecimal number and the zero in front
of the octal number which is pretty nice that way you know exactly the context right.
So you know this is hecks and you know that this is octal and obviously you know that just has a decimal
up here.
I'll tell you a funny story a couple of years ago I was interviewing a candidate for a C++ programming
position and he was an entry level position.
You know you asked him to write code and to ask him some questions about the language.
So I asked him to write a program that accepted an integer and converted it to a text decimal number
and every other candidate that had ever asked that kind of question to goes off and writes a function
and does all kinds of stuff.
This kid went over wrote the program in like 30 seconds and told me he was done and I couldn't believe
it.
So I went over there and just ran at his output was correct and what he did was this which was pretty
clever right.
All he did was ask me for the integer did a stood hex and printed it out.
I was very very clever very bright kid.
I never would've thought about doing that in an interview.
But anyway he got the job and he did he did really well in the end.
So that's a good way to think outside the box sometimes you don't want to go for the fancy algorithms
just do it the easy way.
I'm all for that.
But anyway so here now what we're going to do is notice them and run this again so that you can see
that the 0 x and the F F here and the hex number are lowercase.
If you need to have them in upper case we can use stood upper case just like we are here on line 25.
And when I run that now you'll see that then put that comment back.
So when I run this now you can see that now it's a zero x f.f.
And those are capitalized.
That only applies to hexadecimal numbers because the hex numbers are the only ones that have letters
in them.
OK.
The show pause are show positive modifier right here.
So let me uncomment this code out.
And what this does it only works with decimal values.
And if the number is positive then it displays the plus sign in front of the number by default.
We don't display a plus sign in front of the number.
So let's run this and you can see that right here on the 255 you can see that plus sign right in front
of it.
And that's exactly what that does.
Notice that it has no effect on hex or octal.
It only works on decimals.
And in this case there is a method called set F and what we can see.
And this isn't a manipulator.
This is a method call.
So we're saying stood out.
Dot set f so said F is a method and then we can pass in these format flags.
And what this will do is it'll set it to show base or no show base or upper case or no upper case whatever
you really want here.
So it's an alternate way of doing what we did up here and you tend to see this style more often than
this style but you'll see this sometimes out there just wanted to show you.
And also we can use stood reset Iowas flags to set these back to normal.
So for example this one right here stood AOS based field that'll set your integer base back to decimal
to show base we'll set it back to the default for show base which is not to show the base right.
That's the default.
Again remember this resets it back to the defaults.
This one show positive says it sets it back to not showing the positive and the upper case goes back
to not showing upper case again so don't let that confuse you is not we're not setting it to those flags.
We're just telling it to set it to the default.
OK.
So in this last example I'm just using a real simple input statement and comment de-code out and I'm
asking the user for an integer and I'm putting it right back into that no Verrier what we had before
and I'm just using default to display it as a decimal and then has a hex and then hex uppercase and
then hex again.
And the point here is so that you can see that the setting stick.
So this upper case will still be upper case even though we've already used it because they are persistent
and then no upper case.
And then finally octal hex we're going to show the base and octal at the end.
So again really really straight forward.
Let me run it and we can use a number like let's say 135 and then you go in integers 135 the decimal
value is 135 in hex.
It's 87 and you can see the show based here because I've got no show based right because that was my
default right here.
I said it back to the default to not show base and that's why we're not seeing it.
I notice that when we're not showing the base this upper case has no effect at all which is exactly
what you would expect right.
So that's it in the next video.
What we're going to do is we're going to look at the manipulators for floating point numbers and see
how they work.